## Blog
###### When enrolling into the Applied Data Science program, I had many expectations. As I finished my undergrad as a Computer Science major at Davidson, I was looking for an opportunity to pivot into a more “niche” subcategory of CS. I wanted a program that would give me the technical skills I needed, further my connections within the industry, while also aiding me in my ability to properly communicate findings and insights to other people (particularly stakeholders in a business setting). After arriving at Syracuse University and starting classes at the iSchool, I believe that these goals have been hit. As an undergraduate, it felt as if many of my classes primarily focused on getting you to do the work and pass. All while neglecting whether you as the student retained any of the skills or information required to do said task. In the ADS program, however, I have felt that most of the classes are well structured, fairly paced, and do a good job of giving you assignments and projects that give a good working understanding of what you’re doing. In addition, there was less of a focus on getting something objectively correct, and more of a focus on the process leading up to whatever conclusion you might arrive at. 
###### The program also aided me in my technical skills, as many of the classes gave lots of hands-on experience with Python and R. Besides those two, the program also showed me how to use MS Excel, SQL, Tableau, and Power BI in a Data Analysis perspective. We were then given the opportunities to discuss our actual findings and become accustomed to presenting and articulating ourselves in front of an audience. This will potentially mirror what will be asked of many of us in a professional setting, as many stakeholders will be less concerned about the actual models and libraries used to get the results, and more interested in you explaining said results and their significance. Lastly, I believe that two years in this program have given me opportunities to interact and connect with people in a similar position to me. This has allowed me to further my growth, learn more about space and even give me friendships/connections in the now and in the future. Enrolling at Syracuse has also allowed me to gain access to a very large network of people in many different spaces and fields of interest. 
###### Diving deeper into the program itself, I gained valuable experience and knowledge from a few specific projects and classes in my time here. I personally chose the Artificial Intelligence tract for the ADS program.  Given the massive focus on AI in the world, and the large sums of money being invested into the large LLMs and AI companies, it made sense to jump into this field of study.  I hoped to grasp a better understanding of the AI space in general. One class that helped me with that was my Responsible AI course. This class not only focused on some of the fundamentals of using python to generate basic Machine Learning models but also shone a light on the ethical debate surrounding AI. Along with the lectures and the coursework, the final project in the class really allowed us to dive into how these things really affect us. 
###### My group and I primarily focused on looking at how AI companies, specifically their massive data centers, are affecting communities. After some digging you quickly realize that these data centers have enormous negative impacts, despite how they are portrayed by their respective companies. Firstly, these centers destroy the environment around them. Given their size, these centers consume a lot of electricity, some as much as small cities. With that much power being housed within a confined space, these centers also need mass amounts of water to be cooled down. If you add that these centers also require massive plots of land, these centers consume an enormous number of resources. This overconsumption of resources disenfranchises the communities surrounded by these centers, as many of them are typically resource scarce already. These impacts are made even worse, when you realize that these surrounding areas will have to fund these centers, despite them causing a dip in life quality. They can increase utility bills and cause tax hikes just to compensate for the building of, and the energy consumed by the center itself. Many of these issues are just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to the issues caused by AI data centers. Although they are meant to push humanity “forward”, few people in these areas are feeling any of the supposed benefits that are supposed to accompany these centers. With many people only being left crippled by their presence. 
###### Another project I worked on was a March Madness Prediction Algorithm. I worked on this with 3 other classmates as part of our Machine Learning Final Project. For a slight background, March Madness is in reference to the primary NCAA D1 Postseason basketball tournament. 68 teams are selected, with eight of them playing a preliminary round to get into the main field of 64. From there, teams play in a knockout style tournament to decide the college champion for the year. Given the number of teams, the various styles and talent profiles, along with the randomness factor of knockout style games, perfectly predicting a bracket is quite challenging. One in 9,223,372,036,854,775,808 challenging. With these low odds, we decided to take a crack at making a model that could predict the tournaments outcome. 
###### We scrapped our data from Basketball Reference. We collected basic and advanced stats from 2019 to 2025. The scrapped dataset comprised 552 rows and 151 columns, each row containing the stats of a single game from both the opponent and the main team's perspective. The data mostly contained numeric features, with one categorical feature that contains the names for each team. In addition to this, our target variable “Win” has been encoded as a binary variable, with wins represented as 1 and losses as 0. In addition to these stats, we also looked at other trends that are focused on when making brackets.  Such as whether a team is on a hot streak (ex: won their Conference tournament, have a higher winning percentage in the last 10 games compared to their seasonal percentage). We also clustered teams to account for teams not playing against each other or similar opponents. Given that there are well over 300 D1 basketball teams, and teams only playing around 30 games in the regular season, we wanted to minimize this potential discrepancy as much as possible. After using PCA for dimension reduction and using K-means clustering to group teams, we used the data on models. We used five different models, Logistic Regression, Random Forest, XGBoost, Support Vector Classifier, and an Artificial Neural Network, with the ANN giving the best results. 
###### This project really helped me in many aspects. For one, it allowed me to use these data science skills within the realm of sports and get a hands-on idea of how I could do so in the future. Secondly, it gave me additional experience of working in a team. This grouping was particularly interesting as I had only ever met one of my group mates before taking this class. This taught me how to not just work with different people but also get a grasp of how to adjust to new environments/personalities, while simultaneously working towards getting a project done. It can be quite difficult at times, but I found the experience very worthwhile in hindsight. Thirdly, it furthered my understanding of different models and understanding how to evaluate them. Not only that but also understanding how to interpret their results and knowing what to expect from a model given the data.
###### A third project includes the Pokémon Frame Fill In. I worked on this with two other teammates as part of our Deep Learning Final Project. Anime and Animation Studios in general have continued to boom, as the demand for these shows has grown. With this increase in demand comes an increase in production. This increase in production has consequently led to overworked staff and unhealthy work environments. If these animators and artists had a way to semi-automate this process, it could potentially alleviate the stress on them and even increase overall production for the studio. The model works by receiving key frames within a segment. For example, let’s say the animators provide the first, middle, and final frame of a jumping sequence. This would hypothetically provide the model with a frame of said character getting ready to jump, them at the jump’s apex, and them landing from the jump. The model’s job is to then create the rest of the frames in between these sequences. Our model was trained on the first three Pokémon movies, focusing primarily on that art style. 
###### Working on this project allowed me to work with video/image data for the first time. It allowed me to deal with some of the temporal aspects of this data in contrast to typical numerical data. It also gave me experience with some of the special preprocessing steps needed. This ranged from simply labeling the videos themselves, to generating various clips of different lengths from the three movies. The added experience of working with a computer vision model gave me insight into the capabilities of a relatively simple model. We had limited resources, processing power, and even data, but were still able to produce respectable results considering the circumstances. I can only imagine how well these types of models can perform under better conditions. Adding to this point, this project also reinforced the idea that numerical performance is not an end all be all. Sometimes nuance and personal interpretation (your own visual interpretation/grading in this case) can be just as important. 
###### In addition to these classes and coursework, I also spent my second year in the ADS program working an internship. I was lucky enough to work as a Data Analyst & Engineer Intern with the Syracuse Men’s Basketball team. I got the opportunity to work closely with Alex Kline, the team’s General Manager, along with other recruiting staff. The role mainly entailed me helping with managing the team’s data pipelines, web applications, data collection, and scouting. One of the main tasks I focused on the creation of a centralized scouting app. This app takes scrap data from multiple sites and stores it in one R shiny application. Along with this, the app also enables users to submit scouting notes and player grades and saves them. It also allowed users to label players based off archetype and give them a score based on fit/level. This is then used to populate a big board of the highest rated players of each archetype according to the scouting team. The app makes it so all parts of the scouting process, or at least as many as possible, can all be done in one place. It makes the scouts’ job a lot easier and streamlines the overall process. This theory allows the program to get more eyes on more players, so they are well equipped once the transfer portal opens in April and avoid any reactionary responses. 
###### Working this internship though me quite a lot. As someone trying to enter the sports analytics space, this was very good learning experience as to what I can expect. I experienced much of the fast-paced nature and many open-ended requests and demands. There is a lot of trust given to you with many of the tasks you are assigned. However, there is typically not a detailed guide as to how a coach or staff member wants it completed. Much of it is left for interpretation. This gives you room to work with but also means you must adapt to your situations and learn about the wants and needs of the program in other ways. Whether that be insights from meetings, watching film, asking other interns, or even just intuition, you eventually learn to adjust to the environment. Along with these skills, I continued to hone some of my own technical skills. From using R for shiny applications and different ggplots/data visualizations, to managing the GitHub Repository and automated files.
###### The past two years have greatly impacted me, not just from a knowledge perspective, but also by allowing me to grow as a person and figure myself as professional. I have honed my technical skills in different languages and programing platforms, while also having the opportunity to be surrounded by many like-minded individuals. These connections can be as small as just grasping new ideas to lifelong connections. In addition to my classmates, the ADS program has given me access to a large network of iSchool alum. Hopefully this can lead to other potential opportunities/connections in the present and in the future. In all, the ADS program has done so much for my growth and allowed me to be in the position I am in now. 
